gh-83638: Add sqlite3.Connection.autocommit for PEP 249 compliant behaviour (#93823)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

   .. versionadded:: 3.10
      The ``sqlite3.connect/handle`` auditing event.

   .. versionadded:: 3.12

>       The *autocommit* parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The *autocommit* attribute.
```

   everything until the first ``'['`` for the column name and strip
   the preceding space: the column name would simply be "Expiration date".

.. data:: DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL

   Set :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` to this constant to select deprecated

>    (pre Python 3.12) transaction control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (pre-Python 3.12) transaction control.
```

       By default (``0``), type detection is disabled.

   :param isolation_level:
       See :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` and
       :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.
       Can be ``"DEFERRED"`` (default), ``"EXCLUSIVE"`` or ``"IMMEDIATE"``;
       or ``None`` to disable opening transactions implicitly.

>        Has no effect unless :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is set to
>        :data:`~sqlite3.LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       Has no effect unless :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is set to
       :data:`~sqlite3.LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL` (the default).
```

IMO, its worth mentioning that this _will_ have effect by default, so users don't have to go look that up to check.

       controlling whether and how transactions are implicitly opened.
       Can be ``"DEFERRED"`` (default), ``"EXCLUSIVE"`` or ``"IMMEDIATE"``;
       or ``None`` to disable opening transactions implicitly.

>        See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more.

Reviewer 2: This still needs at least a brief mention that `autocommit` is recommended instead—otherwise, users may not be aware of the new alternative, and the more heads up users have, the smoother the transition will be.

Furthermore, doesn't this now have no effect when `autocommit` is not set to the legacy default? If so, that should be mentioned, or otherwise the interaction explicitly explained. Furthermore, if that is the case, is there a reason to allow passing this at all if users have opted into the new behavior, since it will silently be ignored if so? Why not make it a warning or a an error, rather than letting what is likely an mistake pass silently?

Author: > This still needs at least a brief mention that autocommit is recommended [...]

+1

> Furthermore, doesn't this now have no effect when autocommit is not set to the legacy default? If so, that should be mentioned [...]

+1

> Furthermore, if that is the case, is there a reason to allow passing this at all if users have opted into the new behavior, since it will silently be ignored if so?

Well, it won't have any effect, since those lines of code dealing with `isolation_level` will never run if `autocommit` is True or False. So, "ignored" is not quite right.

> Why not make it a warning or a an error, rather than letting what is likely an mistake pass silently?

That _may_ be a better alternative. I'm not sure deciding on this should block this PR, though. We can add a warning later in the alpha phase.

Author: Actually, I believe we're better off with keeping this section short, refer to the `isolation_level` _attribute_, and expand that section. This means less repetition.

Reviewer 2: > Well, it won't have any effect, since those lines of code dealing with `isolation_level` will never run if `autocommit` is True or False. So, "ignored" is not quite right.

In colloquial English usage, they are effectively synonymous, but technically true (the best kind), I guess, if you want to be pedantic about it :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye: though 

> That may be a better alternative. I'm not sure deciding on this should block this PR, though. We can add a warning later in the alpha phase

:+1: 

> Actually, I believe we're better off with keeping this section short, refer to the isolation_level attribute, and expand that section. This means less repetition.

:+1:

Author: FTR, I won't touch the `isolation_level` param docs more in this PR. We can make it more succinct in a separate PR.

Module constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. data:: DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL

   Set :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` to this constant to select deprecated

>    (pre-Python 3.12) transaction control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (pre-Python 3.12) transaction control behaviour.
```

       The query string allows passing parameters to SQLite,
       enabling various :ref:`sqlite3-uri-tricks`.

   :param autocommit:
       For the *autocommit* parameter, please see the
       :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute. *autocommit* currently defaults to

>        :data:`~sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       See :attr:`Connection.autocommit` for more information.
       *autocommit* currently defaults to
       :data:`~sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
```

Elide unnecessarily verbose text for an austere, structured reference (it is already implicit that we are discussing the *autocommit* parameter, as this is its entry in the parameter table—we don't repeat the parameter name for the others).

Author: Good point. We could possibly also link to the explanation here:

```suggestion
       See :attr:`Connection.autocommit` and :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions`
       for more information.
       *autocommit* currently defaults to
       :data:`~sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
```

>        The default will change to ``False`` in Python 3.14.

Reviewer 2: Will the deprecated value be removed in 3.14, 3.17 or not at all? Either way, that should be noted here, as I was very unsure reading this and it has a significant impact on migration plans.

>    :type autocommit: bool | int

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :type autocommit: bool | DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL
```

This implies this attribute takes arbitrary `int`s, which I presume it doesn't, and it would seem that it also exposes the implementation details of `sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`, which is confusing to me as a user. Therefore, I suggest just listing this explicitly here, if that's what is intended. Otherwise, I'm not sure exactly what this is supposed to mean?

Author: Good catch.

       The query string allows passing parameters to SQLite,
       enabling various :ref:`sqlite3-uri-tricks`.

   :param autocommit:
       See :attr:`Connection.autocommit` and
       :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` for more information.
       *autocommit* currently defaults to
       :data:`~sqlite3.COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`.
       The default will change to ``False`` in a future Python release.

>    :type autocommit: bool | COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL

Reviewer 2: Apparently this doesn't work; Sphinx tries to look this up in the `class` namespace rather than `any`, doesn't find it and issues a warning. Maybe best to just elide the type of the default, since it is stated and linked as such in the description and otherwise takes up a lot of space?

```suggestion
   :type autocommit: bool
```

Author: Yes, I think we're better off with eliding it.

   .. versionadded:: 3.10
      The ``sqlite3.connect/handle`` auditing event.

   .. versionadded:: 3.12

>       The *autocommit* attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      The *autocommit* parameter.
```

Here, `autocommit` is a parameter, not an attribute.

Author: 🤦🏻

> .. function:: complete_statement(statement)

Reviewer 2: Is the `isolation_level` parameter considered deprecated? If so, is there any plan to remove it in 3.14, 3.16, some later version, or is it planned to remain indefintely? Also, is the `sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL` value of `autocommit` considered, well, deprecated? If any of this is the case, a `deprecated`, or preferably `deprecated-removed` directive should be added here clearly stating this (in addition to mentioning the default change).

Author: `isolation_level` is not deprecated yet. I'll mention this in the issue as well, but I'll write my thoughts out here just for the record: I initially intended to change the default `autocommit` value in 3.14 (as the PR docs currently say), but that implies introducing an already deprecated constant, `sqlite3.DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`, which is kinda a weird thing to do, and I should probably leave more time for users to adapt, _and_ it implies deprecating `isolation_level` now in 3.12, because having a different `autocommit` default _and_ keeping the current default for `isolation_level` makes no sense at all. So, a better plan is probably to introduce the `autocommit` attribute now (as we are doing), chose a slightly more friendly name for the deprecated-transaction-control-constant (`COMPAT_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`?), and wait until 3.13 or preferrably 3.14 before introducing the deprecations.

Author: IOW, we introduce `autocommit` as the new _recommended way of doing things_, but we still keep the current defaults; no-one needs to change their code... yet.

Reviewer 2: I wrote a detailed reply to this yesterday, but to my extreme frustration, GitHub seems to have somehow lost it.

In any case, I believe the gist of what I said was:

* Regardless of what the plan is (whether that's deprecate now, deprecate later or never deprecate), it should be clearly communicated to users in the documentation. This both reduces fear, uncertainty and doubt surrounding the deprecation, and aids and encourages users to plan for, raise feedback about and implement the migration smoothly and in plenty of time, making things easier for everyone.
* My suggestion was `LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL` for the name. This is clearer and more specific than `COMPAT` transaction control (compat with what? My first thought would be compatibility with other database types or backends—when in fact it is the PEP 249 behavior that is perhaps more "compatible" in that sense—not retaining legacy behavior from an older Python version,), and also helps gently guide users toward the more modern PEP 249 behavior, without deprecating the old behavior (yet).
* Even if `isolation_level`/etc. isn't deprecated, the new `autocommit` way of doing things should be at least mentioned in the `isolation_level` parameter and attribute entries, to help make users aware of it and guide them toward it as now rather than only right when its deprecated.

In any case, now that you've updated the PR, I'll do another full review, and if any of the above feedback is still relevant, I'll make specific comments and suggestions accordingly.

   An SQLite database connection has the following attributes and methods:

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      Get or set the :pep:`249` transaction behaviour.

>       *autocommit* has tree allowed values:

Reviewer: 🌲

```suggestion
      *autocommit* has three allowed values:
```

Author: 🪚

>       * :const:`False`: PEP 249 compliant transaction behaviour,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * :const:`False`: PEP 249-compliant transaction behaviour,
```

        implying that a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` to close transactions.
        Closing a transaction immediately opens a new one.
        This will be the default value of *autocommit* in Python 3.14.

      * :const:`True`: Use SQLite's autocommit behaviour.
        You are also free to :meth:`execute` custom transaction statements.

>       * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`: Pre Python 3.12 compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`: Pre-Python 3.12 compliant
```

Module constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. data:: DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL

   Set :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` to this constant to select deprecated

>    (pre-Python 3.12) transaction control behaviour.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Set :attr:`Connection.autocommit` to this constant to select
   the deprecated, pre-Python 3.12 transaction control behaviour.
```

* Clarify the phrasing surrounding the behavior's adjectives
* Display the class name, since it isn't necessarily obvious to me without clicking through to the link

Author: Changed to `old style` iso. `the deprecated`. See my comment https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/93823#discussion_r1008747536

>    See :ref:`sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control` for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions-isolation-level` for more information.
```

Ref target updated, per the below.

> .. data:: PARSE_COLNAMES

Reviewer 2: If using the constant itself is deprecated, and particularly if it will eventually be removed at some point, you should add a `deprecated` or preferably a `deprecated-removed` directive here stating such. Otherwise, it might not be a bad idea to explicitly mention that the constant itself is not deprecated.

Module constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. data:: LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL

   Set :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` to this constant to select

>    old style (pre-Python 3.12) transaction control behaviour.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   pre-Python 3.12 transaction control behaviour.
```

Author: I prefer the current wording

Reviewer 3: Fair enough.

   An SQLite database connection has the following attributes and methods:

   .. attribute:: autocommit

>       Get or set :pep:`249` compliant transaction behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Get or set :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.
```

      *autocommit* has three allowed values:

>       * ``False``: :pep:`249` compliant transaction behaviour,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * ``False``: :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
```

        implying that a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` to
        close transactions.
        Closing a transaction immediately opens a new one.
        Transactions are opened by a ``BEGIN`` (``DEFERRED``) statement.

        This will be the default value of *autocommit* in Python 3.14.

      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
        You are also free to :meth:`execute` custom transaction statements.
        :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`
        have no effect in this mode.

      * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`: Pre-Python 3.12 compliant
        transaction control. See :attr:`isolation_level`.
        This is currently the default value of *autocommit*.

>       Changing to ``False`` when there is an open transaction will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Changing *autocommit* to ``False`` when there is an open transaction will
```

      implicitly commit the transaction and open a new one.

>       Changing to ``True`` when there is an open transaction will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Changing *autocommit* to ``True`` when there is an open transaction will
```

      implicitly commit the transaction.

      See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for more details.

      .. note::

>          The :pep:`249` compliant autocommit feature and the SQLite autocommit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the SQLite autocommit
```

   An SQLite database connection has the following attributes and methods:

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      Get or set :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.
      *autocommit* has three allowed values:

      * :const:`False`: PEP 249-compliant transaction behaviour,
        implying that a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` to
        close transactions.
        Closing a transaction immediately opens a new one.

>         Transactions are opened by a BEGIN (DEFERRED) statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Transactions are opened using a ``BEGIN`` (``DEFERRED``) statement.
```

        This will be the default value of *autocommit* in Python 3.14.

      * :const:`True`: Use SQLite's autocommit behaviour.
        You are also free to :meth:`execute` custom transaction statements.
        :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` are silent

>         no-ops.

Reviewer: Not a massive fan of "no-op" here -- feels simultaneously slightly informal and slightly jargony. Maybe something like "`commit()` and `rollback()` have no effect [with this setting]"? (You use it "no-op" in several other places as well, though.)

Author: Ah, yes, we had this talk before :) I do agree, but it is a bad habit I have, so it sneaks in every now and then.

      * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`: Pre-Python 3.12 compliant
        transaction control. See :attr:`isolation_level`.
        This is currently the default value of *autocommit*.

      Changing to :const:`False` when there is an open transaction will
      implicitly commit the transaction and open a new one.

      Changing to :const:`True` when there is an open transaction will
      implicitly commit the transaction.

      See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for more details.

      .. note::

>          The PEP 249-compliant autocommit feature and the SQLite autocommit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the SQLite autocommit
```

   .. method:: commit()

      Commit any pending transaction to the database.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method has no effect.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
      opened if a pending transaction was committed.

   .. method:: rollback()

      Roll back to the start of any pending transaction.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method has no effect.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
      opened if a pending transaction was rolled back.

   .. method:: close()

      Close the database connection.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``False``,

>       any pending transaction is implicitly rolled back,
>       else, no action is taken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      any pending transaction is implicitly rolled back.
      Otherwise, no action is taken.
```

Author: Thanks!

   .. method:: commit()

      Commit any pending transaction to the database.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is :const:`True`,
      or there is no open transaction,

>       this method is a no-op.

Reviewer: This almost looks like poetry, the lines are so short!

Author: Reflowing :)

   .. method:: commit()

      Commit any pending transaction to the database.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,

>       this method has no effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      this method does nothing.
```

To me, using the active voice here reads a little better and is a bit clearer and more direct.

      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly

>       opened if a pending transaction was committed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      opened if a pending transaction was committed by this method.
```

IMO, this wording makes a little more explicit to me what the interaction is between this method specifically and the autocommit (`False`) behavior—the previous took a few re-reads for me to figure out the precise connection. But maybe I'm just a n00b...

Author: It's (almost) always a good thing to be explicit :)

   .. method:: rollback()

      Roll back to the start of any pending transaction.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method has no effect.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly

>       opened if a pending transaction was rolled back.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      this method does nothing.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
      opened if a pending transaction was rolled back by this method.
```

As above

   .. method:: close()

      Close the database connection.

>       If :attr:`autocommit` is ``False``,

Reviewer 2: What about if it is `DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_HANDLING`? Isn't this also the case if `isolation_level` is not `None`? Or am I confused here?

Author: I'd say you are confused. That means the docs are inaccurate :) Mentioning the new constant does absolutely make sense.

      any pending transaction is implicitly rolled back.

>       Otherwise, no action is taken.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This was somewhat confusing to me, implying that `close` does nothing at all unless `autocommit` is ``False``, when in fact it only does something additional to its core function of closing the db connection in this specific mode, so IMO it is least confusing to just elide it.

Author: Good catch.

   .. method:: commit()

      Commit any pending transaction to the database.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method does nothing.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
      opened if a pending transaction was committed by this method.

   .. method:: rollback()

      Roll back to the start of any pending transaction.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method does nothing.
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
      opened if a pending transaction was rolled back by this method.

   .. method:: close()

      Close the database connection.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``False``,
      any pending transaction is implicitly rolled back.

>       If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True`` or :const:`COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``True`` or :const:`COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`,
```

Somehow these two punctuation changes got missed

>       no implicit transaction control is executed.
>       Make sure to :meth:`commit` before closing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      no implicit transaction control is executed,
      so make sure to :meth:`commit` before closing
```

Make it more clear that this latter statement is contingent of the previous.

Author: Actually it is related to both the previous sentences. I'm not sure this change is for the better, as it ties it more closely to the latter sentence. It is meant as a general advice: `commit()` before `close()` is Good Practice™.

Reviewer 2: Oh, right, of course :+1: I just didn't read carefully enough, heh.

   .. method:: commit()

      Commit any pending transaction to the database.

>       If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,

Reviewer 3: I think we could normalize the terminology in this page: there are 6 occurrences of ‘open transaction’ and 9 occurrences of ‘pending transaction’.

Author: Out of scope for this PR. Please make that suggestion independently of this PR.

      this method does nothing.

>       If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
>       opened if a pending transaction was committed by this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, this method also implicitly opens a
      new transaction if committing succeeded.
```

Author: CAM's wording flows better IMO.

Reviewer 2: I actually like the active voice introduced by this change as its more direct and (to me) a bit clearer to follow, but I also find the "if committing succeeded" wording to be rather awkward and potentially confusing. As an alternative, you _could_ consider

```suggestion
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, this method implicitly opens a new transaction
      if it committed a pending transaction.
```

Author: Yeah, that's better than what's proposed, but I'm not sure it is worth changing it.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I had made it right before you merged it, but only submitted it after. If @maggyero or you make a followup PR for further docs refinements, it could be addressed there.

Reviewer 3: The first time I read the current version of this sentence I honestly did not understand it. Only after reviewing the implementation of `commit()` (and `rollback()`) I understood that the ‘if a pending transaction was committed by this method’ refers to the same `commit()` call (i.e. `commit()` first tries to commit, then if it succeeds it tries to begin):

```c
else if (self->autocommit == AUTOCOMMIT_DISABLED) {
         if (connection_exec_stmt(self, "COMMIT") < 0) {
             return NULL;
         }
         if (connection_exec_stmt(self, "BEGIN") < 0) {
             return NULL;
         }
     }
```

   .. method:: rollback()

      Roll back to the start of any pending transaction.
      If :attr:`autocommit` is ``True``, or there is no open transaction,
      this method does nothing.

>       If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, a new transaction is implicitly
>       opened if a pending transaction was rolled back by this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, this method also implicitly opens a
      new transaction if committing succeeded.
```

Author: Ditto

Reviewer 2: Ditto, you _could_ say:

```suggestion
      If :attr:`!autocommit` is ``False``, this method implicitly opens a new transaction
      if it committed a pending transaction.
```

Reviewer 3: Same remark.

      :meth:`executescript` if you want to execute multiple SQL statements with one
      call.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

      .. versionadded:: 3.11

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      This attribute controls :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.
      *autocommit* has three allowed values:

      * ``False``: select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
        implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` to
        close transactions.

        This will be the default value of *autocommit* in Python 3.14.

      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
        :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`
        have no effect in this mode.

      * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`: Pre-Python 3.12 compliant

>         transaction control. See :attr:`isolation_level`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`:
        Pre-Python 3.12 (non-:pep:`249`-compliant) transaction control.
        See :attr:`isolation_level`.
```

IMO, "complaint" was a little confusing here, as it is somewhat unclear what it "complies" with, and the PEP 249 conformance is also not made clear. This clarifies things.

        This is currently the default value of *autocommit*.

      Changing *autocommit* to ``False`` will open a new transaction.

>       Changing *autocommit* to ``True`` will commit any pending transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Changing *autocommit* to ``False`` will open a new transaction,
      and changing it to ``True`` will commit any pending transaction.
```

Consolidate these for better readability, conciseness and to avoid two near duplicate lines.

>       See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions-autocommit` for more details.
```

Use newly added, more precise ref target

      .. note::

         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the SQLite autocommit

>          mode are two related, but different concepts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and
         the SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
```

* Link SQLite autocommit mode
* Use more idiomatic phrasing

      .. versionadded:: 3.11

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      This attribute controls :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.

>       *autocommit* has three allowed values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      :attr:`!autocommit` has three allowed values:
```

We're taking about the attribute, not the parameter here, so we should format it accordingly.

Author: Good catch!

>       * ``False``: select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * ``False``: Select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
```

The others all use sentence case here, so presumably this should be no different.

        implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.

>         Use :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Use :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` to
```

You're already inside `Connection`, so no need to include the class and then elide it.

        close transactions.

>         This is the recommended value of *autocommit*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        This is the recommended value of :attr:`!autocommit`.
```

Again, we're talking about an attribute, not a parameter here.

      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.

>         :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback`
```

Likewise

>         have no effect in this mode.

Reviewer 2: Does using either of these affect the behavior of `isolation_level`, or mean that it is ignored? You probably want to mention that if so, either in a note/etc. if they both have the same effect (e.g. ignoring it), or separately in each one if they affect it differently.

      * :data:`COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`:
        Pre-Python 3.12 (non-:pep:`249`-compliant) transaction control.

>         See :attr:`isolation_level`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        See :attr:`isolation_level` for more details.
```

A bit more complete

>         This is currently the default value of *autocommit*.
> 
>       Changing *autocommit* to ``False`` will open a new transaction,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        This is currently the default value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

      Changing :attr:`!autocommit` to ``False`` will open a new transaction,
```

As before.

      and changing it to ``True`` will commit any pending transaction.

      See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` for more details.

      .. note::

         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the

>          SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related, but different concepts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
```

Like some others, I made this suggestion before to improve readability and sound more idiomatic, but it seems it wasn't applied completely...another pitfall of manually trying to apply suggestions, which is why I do a full re-review in that case to catch these omissions.

      :attr:`!autocommit` has three allowed values:

      * ``False``: Select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
        implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` to close transactions.

        This is the recommended value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
        :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` have no effect in this mode.

      * :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`:
        Pre-Python 3.12 (non-:pep:`249`-compliant) transaction control.
        See :attr:`isolation_level` for more details.

        This is currently the default value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

      Changing :attr:`!autocommit` to ``False`` will open a new transaction,
      and changing it to ``True`` will commit any pending transaction.

      See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` for more details.

      .. note::

         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the
         SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
         Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite

>          autocommit mode.

Reviewer 2: FYI, IMO this note is a better version of the one in the explanation, that leaves the What Ifs out of it and just clarifies the main points of act. I'd also suggest either replacing that one with this one, or just leave this one here and removing that one.

Also, it looks rather odd to have the two notes back to back, so I'd suggest moving it to under the `True` bullet where SQLIte's autocommit mode is mentioned.

      .. note::

         The :attr:`isolation_level` attribute has no effect unless
         :attr:`autocommit` is :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

> 

Reviewer 2: If we're going to call this out in a note here, we probably should call it out in a note on the actual `isolation_level ` attribute, since it seems to me that its salience is at least as critical for users of the attribute it directly affects vs. the one that does the affecting.

      .. versionadded:: 3.11

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      This attribute controls :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.
      :attr:`!autocommit` has three allowed values:

      * ``False``: Select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
        implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` to close transactions.

        This is the recommended value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

>       * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_,
      implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` does not implicitly open any transactions at all.
```

Author: We deliberately keep the reference succinct. Please see previous discussions in this PR. For further explanation, we link to the _Explanation_ section.

Reviewer 3: I added this clause because in the same list you used a similar clause for `autocommit=False`:

```
 * ``False``: Select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
         implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.
```

Author: If this is a problem we can address it in a follow-up docs fixup.

        :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` have no effect in this mode.

      * :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`:

>         Pre-Python 3.12 (non-:pep:`249`-compliant) transaction control.

Reviewer 3: This is not stated for `autocommit=True`, which is neither PEP 249-compliant.

```suggestion
        Pre-Python 3.12 transaction control.
```

Author: This comment makes no sense. Both boolean values are specified by the upcoming PEP 249 amendment; leaving one of the available boolean values out of the spec would be absurd. The only thing that is not PEP 249 compliant is the legacy mode.

Reviewer 3: I had this understanding too (both boolean values are PEP-249-compliant), but since you documented PEP-249-compliance only for `autocommit=False` in this list, I interpreted `autocommit=True` as non PEP-249-compliant in the sense that PEP-249 prescribes database drivers to use `autocommit=False` *by default*.

So since the reading confused me, I suggest to state explicitly that `autocommit=True` is PEP-249-compliant in this list, like you did for `autocommit=False`.

Author: I'm not convinced, but if this turns out to be a problem we can address it in a follow-up issue and PR.

      .. versionadded:: 3.11

   .. attribute:: autocommit

      This attribute controls :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour.
      :attr:`!autocommit` has three allowed values:

      * ``False``: Select :pep:`249`-compliant transaction behaviour,
        implying that :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures a transaction is always open.
        Use :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` to close transactions.

        This is the recommended value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

      * ``True``: Use SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.

>         :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` have no effect in this mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        :meth:`commit` and :meth:`rollback` have no effect in this mode.

        .. note::

           The :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`!autocommit` attribute and the
           SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
           Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
           autocommit mode.
```

Move the note here, where its most relevant and avoid an undesirable double-note. Also, tweak the text to clarify what "autocommit feature" we're talking about here, specifically the `autocommit` attribute required by PEP 249.

Author: How about including it in the existing note, but as a separate paragraph?

<details>
<summary>Diff</summary>

```diff
diff --git a/Doc/library/sqlite3.rst b/Doc/library/sqlite3.rst
index 3f488c37ce..a367a54903 100644
--- a/Doc/library/sqlite3.rst
+++ b/Doc/library/sqlite3.rst
@@ -1279,16 +1279,14 @@ Connection objects
 
       .. note::
 
-         The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the
+         The :attr:`isolation_level` attribute has no effect unless
+         :attr:`autocommit` is :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
+
+         The :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`!autocommit` attribute and the
          SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
          Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
          autocommit mode.
 
-      .. note::
-
-         The :attr:`isolation_level` attribute has no effect unless
-         :attr:`autocommit` is :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
-

```

</details>

Reviewer 2: I'm personally not as fond of concatenating the two, since they are on two distinct topics, and readers may read the first few lines and assume the rest isn't relevant. But its not the end of the world...it would look better than two back to back notes, even though not as conceptually/semantically pure.

One alternative approach would be to use an `important` admonition for the "no effect" one, which would be perhaps more appropriate, and put it first, while retaining the `note` admonition for the second...assuming the Python Docs Theme actually properly gives these different colors/styles.

Author: Hm. Perhaps a better place for the note in question would be in the explanation (_Transaction control via the autocommit attribute_).

Reviewer 2: Yeah, great point—that's a much better idea, as it makes a lot more sense in an explanation vs a reference.

      * :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`:
        Pre-Python 3.12 (non-:pep:`249`-compliant) transaction control.
        See :attr:`isolation_level` for more details.

        This is currently the default value of :attr:`!autocommit`.

      Changing :attr:`!autocommit` to ``False`` will open a new transaction,
      and changing it to ``True`` will commit any pending transaction.

>       See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` for more details.
> 
>       .. note::
> 
>          The :pep:`249`-compliant autocommit feature and the
>          SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
>          Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
>          autocommit mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` for more details.
```

Move this to where the SQLite `autocommit` mode is discussed, where its more relevant and avoids an undesirable double-note.

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

      This attribute controls the :ref:`transaction handling
      <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` performed by :mod:`!sqlite3`.
      If set to ``None``, transactions are never implicitly opened.
      If set to one of ``"DEFERRED"``, ``"IMMEDIATE"``, or ``"EXCLUSIVE"``,
      corresponding to the underlying `SQLite transaction behaviour`_,
      implicit :ref:`transaction management
      <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` is performed.

      If not overridden by the *isolation_level* parameter of :func:`connect`,

>       the default is ``""``, which is an alias for ``"DEFERRED"``.

Reviewer 2: Likewise, it seems you should at least mention here:

* That using the `autocommit` attribute is recommended over this, otherwise users might not be aware of it
* The interaction with this attribute and autocommit, if the latter is not set to its default value (doesn't that change or negate the behavior of this one?)

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

      Legacy control of the :ref:`transaction handling
      <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` performed by :mod:`!sqlite3`.
      If set to ``None``, transactions are never implicitly opened.
      If set to one of ``"DEFERRED"``, ``"IMMEDIATE"``, or ``"EXCLUSIVE"``,
      corresponding to the underlying `SQLite transaction behaviour`_,

>       implicit :ref:`transaction management

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      :ref:`implicit transaction management
```

Clarify that the link target includes specific discussion of this, rather than transaction management more generally

      <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` is performed.

      If not overridden by the *isolation_level* parameter of :func:`connect`,
      the default is ``""``, which is an alias for ``"DEFERRED"``.

      Using :attr:`autocommit` to control transaction handling is recommended
      over using :attr:`!isolation_level`.
      :attr:`!isolation_level` has no effect unless :attr:`autocommit` is set

>       to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL` (the default).
```

Again, clarify this is the default so users don't have to go look it up on their own.

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

>       Legacy control of the :ref:`transaction handling
>       <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` performed by :mod:`!sqlite3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Controls the :ref:`legacy transaction handling mode
      <sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level>` of :mod:`!sqlite3`.
```

Re-reading this, I found the current revision of the syntax quite confusing and hard to understand and follow. I've tweaked it to be closer to the original and be much easier to read.

Author: Definitely easier to read. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: Hey @erlend-aasland it seems you intended to apply this, either manually or automatically, but it looks like I still don't see it on the PR. Was this an oversight, or do you have it locally and it hasn't been pushed yet?

Author: Yeah, I haven't pushed it yet. I was waiting for the last unresolved conversation to resolve :)

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

> Controlling Transactions Using the Autocommit Property

Reviewer: Property or Attribute?

Author: I guess attribute is more correct. I'll make sure that term is used consistently.

------------------------------------------------------

The underlying ``sqlite3`` library operates in ``autocommit`` mode by default,
but the Python :mod:`sqlite3` module by default does not.

Use the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` property to select transaction mode.
This attribute can also be set when :meth:`connecting <~Connection.connect>`.

Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,
which means transaction control is selected using the
:attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` property.
See :ref:`sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control` for more information.

> Starting with Python 3.14, *autocommit* will default to :const:`False`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in Python 3.14, *autocommit* will default to :const:`False`,
```

> which will imply :pep:`249` compliant transaction control. This means:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which will imply :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control. This means:
```

* A transaction is always open.

> * Commit transactions using :meth:`~Connection.commit`.
> * Roll back transactions using :meth:`~Connection.rollback`.

Reviewer: The preceding paragraph and the rest of the list are in the third person; using the second person here feels a bit weird. I don't know if "can be" or "should be" would be better here, though?

```suggestion
* Transactions can be committed using :meth:`~Connection.commit`.
* Transactions can be rolled back using :meth:`~Connection.rollback`.
```

> * Commit and rollback will open a new transaction immediately after execution.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
* ``commit`` and ``rollback`` will open a new transaction immediately after execution.
```

* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is closed with pending
  changes.

Set *autocommit* to :const:`True` to enable SQLite's autocommit mode.

> This mode is equal to setting :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mode is equivalent to setting :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` to
```

:const:`None`.

``autocommit=True`` means that statements that modify the database take effect
immediately.  A ``BEGIN`` or ``SAVEPOINT`` statement disables ``autocommit``
mode, and a ``COMMIT``, a ``ROLLBACK``, or a ``RELEASE`` that ends the
outermost transaction, turns ``autocommit`` mode back on.

.. _sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control:

Controlling Transactions Using the Isolation Level Property
-----------------------------------------------------------

.. note::

>    The recommended way of controlling transactions, is via the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
```

the Python :mod:`sqlite3` module issues a ``BEGIN`` statement
implicitly before a Data Modification Language (DML) statement
(``INSERT``, ``UPDATE``, ``DELETE``, and ``REPLACE``).

You can control the kind of ``BEGIN`` statement ``sqlite3`` implicitly
executes via the *isolation_level* parameter to the :func:`connect`
call, or via the :attr:`isolation_level` property of connection objects.
By default, ``BEGIN`` is used, which is equivalent to
``isolation_level="DEFERRED"``.
Other possible values are ``"IMMEDIATE"`` and ``"EXCLUSIVE"``.

Disable the :mod:`sqlite3` module's implicit transaction control by
setting :attr:`isolation_level` to ``None``.  This will leave the underlying
``sqlite3`` library operating in ``autocommit`` mode.  You can then completely
control transactions by explicitly executing ``BEGIN``, ``ROLLBACK``,
``SAVEPOINT``, and ``RELEASE`` statements in your code.

Note that :meth:`~Cursor.executescript` disregards
:attr:`isolation_level`; any transaction control must be added explicitly.

.. versionchanged:: 3.6
   ``sqlite3`` used to implicitly commit an open transaction before DDL
   statements.  This is no longer the case.

> .. versionchanged: 3.12

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. versionchanged:: 3.12
```

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is now via the

>    :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` parameter.

Reviewer: Attribute? property? (Probably not "parameter" 🙂)

   .. method:: executescript(sql_script, /)

      Execute the SQL statements in *sql_script*.

>       If :attr:`autocommit` is :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      If the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` mode of the :class:`Connection`
      is :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`
```

Missing the class here so the reference is broken, and best to be more explicit about the relationship here (assuming I understand it correctly)

If this commit fails,
or if the body of the ``with`` statement raises an uncaught exception,
the transaction is rolled back.
If :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``True``,
a new transaction is implicitly opened after committing or rolling back.

If there is no open transaction upon leaving the body of the ``with`` statement,
or if :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``False``,

> the context manager is a no-op.

Reviewer: "no-op" 👀

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

> Transaction Control via the Autocommit Attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction Control via the ``autocommit`` Attribute
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Use the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute to select transaction mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute to select a transaction mode.
```

This attribute can also be set when :func:`connecting <connect>`.

> Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,
> which means transaction control is selected using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
This causes transaction control to be selected using the
```

:attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control` for more information.

Starting in Python 3.14, *autocommit* will default to :const:`False`,
which will imply :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control. This means:

* A transaction is always open.
* Transactions can be committed using :meth:`~Connection.commit`.
* Transactions can be rolled back using :meth:`~Connection.rollback`.
* ``commit()`` and ``rollback()`` will implicitly open a new transaction
  immediately after execution.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is closed with pending
  changes.

> Set *autocommit* to :const:`True` to enable SQLite's autocommit mode.

Reviewer: Might it be possible to link to a reference on SQLite's autocommit mode?

In this mode, ``commit()`` and ``rollback()`` are silent no-ops.

.. note::

   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` and SQLite's autocommit mode are not linked.

>    For example, Explicitly issuing a BEGIN statement when ``autocommit=True``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, Explicitly issuing a ``BEGIN`` statement when ``autocommit=True``,
```

   will not change the value of the *autocommit* attribute.

   Use :attr:`~Connection.in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
   autocommit mode.

.. _sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control:

> Transaction Control via the Isolation Level Attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transaction Control via the ``isolation_level`` Attribute
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.

If :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is set to
:data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`, transaction control is selected using

> the :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
```

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute to select a transaction mode.
This attribute can also be set when :func:`connecting <connect>`.

Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.
This causes transaction control to be selected using the
:attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control` for more information.

Starting in Python 3.14, *autocommit* will default to ``False``,

> which will imply :pep:`249` compliant transaction control, meaning:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which will imply :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control, meaning:
```

If this commit fails,
or if the body of the ``with`` statement raises an uncaught exception,
the transaction is rolled back.

> If :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``True``,

Reviewer 3: The opposite.

```suggestion
If :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``False``,
```

Author: Thanks, this is a valid remark.

a new transaction is implicitly opened after committing or rolling back.

If there is no open transaction upon leaving the body of the ``with`` statement,

> or if :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``False``,

Reviewer 3: Likewise.

```suggestion
or if :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is ``True``,
```

Author: Thanks, this is a valid remark.

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: Previously, `sqlite3-controlling-transactions` pointed to an explanation section about transaction control in general, specifically the old behavior, whereas now it points to the new behavior (despite still being generic), with a new ref target for the old behavior, which leaves many places using it pointing to the wrong thing (if they specifically refer to the old behavior), and/or with inappropriate titles (if they're referring to transaction control more generally).

I believe the simplest/best way to handle this in order to keep consistent section names and targets before, during and after the migration period and minimize churn, while also accurately reflecting the current state of things, is to retain a top-level Transaction Control section, with the above ref target, and have two subsections (with their own ref targets) for the two specific types. giving you the best of both worlds, i.e.

```suggestion
Transaction control
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions-autocommit:

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

Author: I agree, that's probably a better option.

> Use the :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute to select

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute to select
```

Seems a little clearer to show its class explicitly here.

> transaction control mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the transaction control mode.
```

Grammar

This attribute should preferrably be set using the *autocommit* parameter
of :func:`connect`.

Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

> This causes transaction control to be selected using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, *autocommit* defaults to :const:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,
which means transaction behavior is controlled using the
```

* Use clearer and more direct phrasing (was previously a bit harder than necessary for me to parse)
* Improve readability/flow

> :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
```

Maybe better to be clear what its an attribute of here too?

> See :ref:`sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control` for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions-isolation-level` for more information.
```

Ref target updated

Starting in Python 3.14, *autocommit* will default to ``False``,

> which will imply :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control, meaning:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which will imply :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
This means:
```

Breaking this up like this reads better and is less run-on-y, IMO

* :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,

>   meaning :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  so :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`
```

Avoid repeating "meaning" again here, as it was already used earlier in this sentence (prior to the colon)

  will implicitly open new transactions immediately after closing

>   the pending transaction.

Reviewer 2: Mismatched singular/plural agreement here. I suggest going with the singular both places to be a little clearer and more specific:

```suggestion
  will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing
  the pending transaction.
```

  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly

>   using :meth:`!~Connection.commit`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  using :meth:`!commit`.
```

With `!~`, the `~` has no effect (and is displayed instead), while `~!` does work to remove the `!Connection`, but the `!` only works by accident (because there is no `!Connection` class) and the link is still attempted to be resolved and fails, producing a warning. Therefore, this is the least bad option.

* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly

>   using :meth:`!~Connection.rollback`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  using :meth:`!rollback`.
```

As above

> * An implicit rollback is performed if the database is closed with
>   pending changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.
```

Reference the relevant method with more details.

Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
In this mode, :meth:`~Connection.commit()` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback()`
have no effect.

.. note::

>    :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` and SQLite's autocommit mode are not linked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` and SQLite's `autocommit mode`_ are not linked.
```

Maybe better to link it here too, so the note stands on its own?

   For example,

>    explicitly issuing a ``BEGIN`` statement when ``autocommit=True``,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   explicitly issuing a ``BEGIN`` statement when
   :attr:`!autocommit` is ``True``
```

I was confused if this was referring to the `Connection.autocommit` attribute, or the SQLite autocommit mode. This syntax clarifies it (and is more idiomatic), assuming I've interpreted this correctly that this is indeed referring to the `sqlite3` autocommit mode.

   will not change the value of the *autocommit* attribute.

>    Use :attr:`~Connection.in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
```

IMO, its useful to be clear that this is an attribute of `Connection`, rather than anything else, without having to click through the link.

   autocommit mode.

.. _sqlite3-deprecated-transaction-control:

Transaction control via the ``isolation_level`` attribute (deprecated)

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions-isolation-level:

Transaction control via the ``isolation_level`` attribute (deprecated)
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
```

As above

.. note::

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.

>    See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions-autocommit`.
```

Use more precise ref target

If :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` is set to

> :data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`, transaction control is selected using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:data:`DEPRECATED_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,
transaction behavior is controlled using
```

IMO, like the above, this is a little clearer and more direct/readable for me

:ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` is recommended,
while :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level`
retains the pre-Python 3.12 behaviour.

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit:

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The recommended way of controlling transaction behaviour is through
the :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute,
which should preferrably be set using the *autocommit* parameter
of :func:`connect`.

It is suggested to set *autocommit* to ``False``,
which implies :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
This means:

* :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,
  so :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
  will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing
  the pending one.
  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

> Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
> In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
> have no effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
have no effect.
Note that SQLite's autocommit mode is distinct from
the :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute;
use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query
the low-level SQLite autocommit mode.
```

As discussed above/below, integrate the note as prose where it is most relevant, and also fix broken `:attr:` reference (and parallel it with `autocommit` to draw the distinction more clearly).

Author: I think this is a very good outcome for that ex-note :) Thanks again!

Set *autocommit* to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`
to leave transaction control behaviour to the
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.

.. note::
   The :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`!autocommit` attribute and the
   SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
   Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite

>    autocommit mode.

Reviewer 2: One last nag—putting the note here leaves the next subhead bracketed by admonitions both top and bottom, which IMO makes the document structure harder to easily follow and is visually uncomfortable. Wouldn't it be better to put it one paragraph up, directly below the paragraph it is most relevant to (where the SQLite autocommit mode is introduced), rather than separating the two by a much less related paragraph?

Alternatively, if there is still a reason to separate them, we should link `` `autocommit mode`_ ``.

Author: Hm, how about making it a paragraph of the text instead of a note? I'm not sure it deserves being promoted visually as a note.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, that could work if you don't feel it deserves to be called out as a note. However, in that case the text needs to be moved to the previous autocommit=True paragraph and rewritten as integrated prose, since that is where it is actually relevant to mention inline to make that distinction, given that is where both potentially-confused terms are discussed, since it is no longer a standalone callout.

I've made a suggestion to that effect, as well as fixed a broken reference to the attribute, due to no longer being inside its class.

> Transaction control
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: When actually rendered, it looks like a mistake to have three section headers stacked up in a row with no words between them—especially since, inexplicably, with the legacy Python docs theme, h3 and h4 _are the same size_ (one more reason to dump the old theme as soon as practical).

Therefore, we need to add some text here, even if just a short summary. Here's a shot at it:

```suggestion
Transaction control
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:mod:`!sqlite3` offers multiple methods of controlling whether, when and how
database transactions opened and closed.
:ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` is recommended,
while :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level`
is consistent with pre-Python 3.12 versions of the module.
```

Author: Yeah, I thought about this myself. I'll add something.

> .. _sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit:

Reviewer 2: While from a greenfield perspective it would be best to use `transaction-control` rather than `controlling-transactions` for this, the latter is what's used for the ref target label of the section this belongs to, which why my previous (unused) suggestions used them. it seems inconsistent, potentially confusing and breaks the logical hierarchy to arbitrarily use a different spelling in the subsections.

Therefore, I suggest either:

* Changing them all back to what I recommended, i.e. `sqlite3-controlling-transacations-autocommit`, or (much less work)
* Just adding another ref target label, `sqlite3-transaction-control`, to the `Transaction control` section.

Author: I prefer the latter.

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The recommended way of controlling transaction behaviour is through

> the :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the :attr:`Connection.autocommit`.
```

Avoid repetition in the next sentence and sounding too contradictory with saying that setting it as an _attribute_ rather than though the parameter is _not_ recommended.

This attribute should preferrably be set using the *autocommit* parameter
of :func:`connect`.

> It is recommended to set *autocommit* to ``False``,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is suggested to set *autocommit* to ``False``,
```

Avoid repeating "recommended", which was just used for something else

> implying :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which implies :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
```

A bit more readable

This means:

* :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,

>   so :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  so :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
```

Seems better to be explicit these these are methods of this class, not, e.g., functions of the module

  will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing

>   the pending transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the pending one.
```

Avoid repetition

  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly
  using :meth:`!commit`.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly
  using :meth:`!rollback`.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.

> In this mode, :meth:`~Connection.commit()` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
```

Again, best to be explicit I think, and the `()`s are unnecessary (as they are handled automatically)

Author: Yeah, I'm not sure why the parentheses were there. Leftovers from a very early revision I guess.

have no effect.

Set *autocommit* to :const:`COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`
to leave transaction control behaviour to the
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.

.. note::

   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` and SQLite's `autocommit mode`_
   are not linked.
   For example, explicitly issuing a ``BEGIN`` statement when
   :attr:`!autocommit` is ``True`` will not change the value of
   the *autocommit* attribute.

   Use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite

>    autocommit mode.

Reviewer 2: You might want to move this note to right below the description of the `True` value, where it both seems more directly relevant, and also looks a little better/clearer (not clashing with the other note and making the start of the next section less obvious).

Author: Hm, I wonder if it is a mistake to actually include this note at all. Maybe it is better to keep it simple and avoid this what-if-ish note.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, IMO the note under the `autocommit` attribute avoids the What If ish parts and simply clearly states the facts, so maybe either move that one here, or remove this one and just leave that one?

Author: Just stating the facts is almost always a good thing. I'm removing the _what if_.

>    autocommit mode.
> 
> .. _sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   autocommit mode.

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level:
```

Missing line break (per the devguide and to reduce merge conflicts)

Transaction control via the ``isolation_level`` attribute
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. note::

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.
   See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit`.

If :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is set to
:data:`COMPAT_TRANSACTIONAL_CONTROL`,
transaction behaviour is controlled using

> the :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.

Reviewer 2: What if it's not? Does the attribute have no effect? If so, you should state this explicitly.

  the pending one.
  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
have no effect.

Set *autocommit* to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`
to leave transaction control behaviour to the
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.

.. note::

   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` and SQLite's `autocommit mode`_
   are not linked.
   For example, explicitly issuing a ``BEGIN`` statement when
   :attr:`!autocommit` is ``True`` will not change the value of
   the *autocommit* attribute.

   Use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
   autocommit mode.

.. note::

   The :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute has no effect unless

>    :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`.

Reviewer 2: IMO, its more salient to call this out in the `isolation_level` section in a note, as opposed to one here, especially since it makes the document structure hard to parse with a note, then a note, then a heading, then another note. I'd suggest embedding it in the existing note at the top of the next `isolation_level` section.

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level:

Transaction control via the ``isolation_level`` attribute
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. note::

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.
   See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit`.

If :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is set to
:data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,
transaction behaviour is controlled using

> the :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute,
> else it has no effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
Otherwise, :attr:`!isolation_level` has no effect.
```

Be more clear about what the "it" is, and here you'd use "otherwise" rather than "else" in idiomatic English

Explanation
-----------

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control:
.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

Transaction control
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:mod:`!sqlite3` offers multiple methods of controlling whether,
when and how database transactions are opened and closed.
:ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` is recommended,
while :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level`
retains the pre-Python 3.12 behaviour.

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit:

Transaction control via the ``autocommit`` attribute
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The recommended way of controlling transaction behaviour is through
the :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute,
which should preferrably be set using the *autocommit* parameter
of :func:`connect`.

> It is suggested to set *autocommit* to ``False``,
> which implies :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
> This means:
> 
> * :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,
>   so :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
>   will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing
>   the pending one.
>   :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
> * Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`.
> * Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`.
> * An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
>   :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is suggested to set *autocommit* to ``False``,
which implies :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
This means:

* :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,
  so :meth:`Connection.connect`, :meth:`Connection.commit`,
  and :meth:`Connection.rollback` implicitly open a new transaction;
  transactions should not be opened explicitly with a `BEGIN` statement.
  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`;
  transactions should not be committed explicitly with a `COMMIT` statement.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`;
  transactions should not be rolled back explicitly with a `ROLLBACK` statement.
* :meth:`Connection.close` implicitly rolls back any pending transaction.
```

Author: IMO, this makes the text more unreadable and fails to clearly communicate the effects of `autocommit is False`.

Reviewer 3: I compared your text with [@malemburg’s specification](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/83638#issuecomment-1093853924):

> If this is set to False, the module could then implement the
> correct way of handling transactions, which means:
> 
> a) start a new transaction when the connection is opened
> b) start a new transaction after .commit() and .rollback()
> c) don't start new transactions anywhere else
> d) run an implicit .rollback() when the connection closes

and I failed to see the items a) and c) in your text.

> Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
> In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
> have no effect.
> Note that SQLite's autocommit mode is distinct from
> the :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute;
> use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query
> the low-level SQLite autocommit mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
This means:

* :mod:`!sqlite3` does not implicitly open any transactions at all.
* The user can perform their own transaction handling
  with `BEGIN`, `COMMIT`, and `ROLLBACK` statements.
* SQLite's `autocommit mode`_ can be queried using the
  :attr:`~Connection.in_transaction` attribute.
* :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
  have no effect.
```

Author: - We should not encourage users to do their own transaction handling. `sqlite3` is _not_ an SQLite shim (like apsw); `sqlite3` is a _PEP 249 compliant_ interface. In PEP 249 there are only _two recommended modes of operation_: `autocommit is True` and `autocommit is False`.
- `Connection.in_transaction` is valid no matter the transaction mode of sqlite3. It does not make sense to list it as a specific thing for `autocommit is True`.
- The text hammered out by Alex and CAM is fine as it is.

Reviewer 3: > We should not encourage users to do their own transaction handling.

That is a valid point, users might interpret this possibility as an advice.

> Connection.in_transaction is valid no matter the transaction mode of sqlite3.

I agree, the only reason I mentioned it here is because it was already in the original text, in the same paragraph as `Set *autocommit* to ``True```:

> use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query
> the low-level SQLite autocommit mode.

But it should really be isolated in its own paragraph.

of :func:`connect`.

It is suggested to set *autocommit* to ``False``,
which implies :pep:`249`-compliant transaction control.
This means:

* :mod:`!sqlite3` ensures that a transaction is always open,
  so :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
  will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing
  the pending one.
  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
have no effect.
Note that SQLite's autocommit mode is distinct from
the :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`Connection.autocommit` attribute;
use :attr:`Connection.in_transaction` to query
the low-level SQLite autocommit mode.

Set *autocommit* to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`
to leave transaction control behaviour to the
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.

> See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.
> 
> .. note::
>    The :pep:`249`-compliant :attr:`!autocommit` attribute and the
>    SQLite `autocommit mode`_ are two related but distinct concepts.
>    Use :attr:`in_transaction` to query the low-level SQLite
>    autocommit mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.
```

Err, the note wasn't actually removed (unless you did the addition remotely but the removal only locally) :)

Author: Argh, this always happens with long-lived PRs. Towards the end it gets close to impossible to keep track of everything. Thanks for catching this 😃

Explanation
-----------

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control:
.. _sqlite3-controlling-transactions:

Transaction control
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:mod:`!sqlite3` offers multiple methods of controlling whether,
when and how database transactions are opened and closed.
:ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit` is recommended,
while :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level`

> is consistent with pre-Python 3.12 versions of the :mod:`!sqlite3` module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
retains the behavior of pre-Python 3.12 versions of the :mod:`!sqlite3` module.
```

A little clearer phrasing here

Author: Or even simpler?

```suggestion
retains pre-Python 3.12 behaviour.
```

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that's better—just missing a definite article:

```suggestion
retains the pre-Python 3.12 behaviour.
```

  will implicitly open a new transaction immediately after closing
  the pending one.
  :mod:`!sqlite3` uses ``BEGIN DEFERRED`` statements when opening transactions.
* Transactions should be committed explicitly using :meth:`!commit`.
* Transactions should be rolled back explicitly using :meth:`!rollback`.
* An implicit rollback is performed if the database is
  :meth:`~Connection.close`-ed with pending changes.

Set *autocommit* to ``True`` to enable SQLite's `autocommit mode`_.
In this mode, :meth:`Connection.commit` and :meth:`Connection.rollback`
have no effect.

Set *autocommit* to :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`
to leave transaction control behaviour to the
:attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level` for more information.

.. _sqlite3-transaction-control-isolation-level:

Transaction control via the ``isolation_level`` attribute
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. note::

   The recommended way of controlling transactions is via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.
   See :ref:`sqlite3-transaction-control-autocommit`.

If :attr:`Connection.autocommit` is set to

> :data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:data:`LEGACY_TRANSACTION_CONTROL` (the default),
```

Clarity this is currently the default, as we have elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: @erlend-aasland just double checking on this one, since the other one might have been missed.

   :mod:`!sqlite3` used to implicitly commit an open transaction before DDL
   statements.  This is no longer the case.

> .. versionchanged:: 3.12
>    The recommended way of controlling transactions is now via the
>    :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.

Reviewer 2: Since the only "change" here is deprecating this behavior and adding a recommended replacement, the ``deprecated`` directive seems a lot more appropriate here (and is also helpful programmatically).

```suggestion
.. deprecated:: 3.12
   The recommended way of controlling transactions is now via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.
```

Furthermore, as discussed, it would be even better to be explicit about current removal plans, e.g.

```suggestion
.. deprecated-removed:: 3.12 3.16
   The recommended way of controlling transactions is now via the
   :attr:`~Connection.autocommit` attribute.
```
